# Python Workshop Day 2 
Welcome to the Chemistry Department Programming Workshop Day 2!  
   
These tutorials will focus on more advanced data analysis and visualization tools, and give some time for integration with your own data.
  
Day 2 consists of 4 sub-modules:  
* `2.0 Data Processing and Analysis` – statistical analysis, regression and smoothing  
* [`2.1 Complex Formatting and Data Visualization`](2.1_day2_complex_formatting.md) – using class strutures to access complex formatting 
* [`2.2 Prompt Engineering for Generative AI`](./2.2_day2_prompt_engineering_for_generative_ai.md) – how to write effective prompts for GPT and interpret the code it writes
* [`2.3 Applications to Your Data`](./2.3_day2_applications_to_your_data.md) – try to apply workshop tools to you own datasets!

## 2.1 Complex Formatting and Data Visualization
---

**Contents**  
  
In this module, you will:
 * [2.1.1 Interpret Class Structures](#211-interpreting-class-structures)
 * [2.1.2 Apply Class Methods for Complex Formatting](#212-applying-class-methods-for-complex-formatting)
 * [2.1.3 Write a Custom Plotting Class](#213-writing-a-custom-plotting-class)


## 2.1.1 Interpreting Class Structures  
Many of the common packages use **class structures** to organize their methods. This is consistent with *object-oriented programming*, which generally involved creating types of data called *objects* that know certain things about themselves, including what kind of object they are, how to print themselves, and possibly other functions that can be performed on them. Locating and interpreting information about the object typeand class structure can be useful for applying more complex formatting, and simplifying your own plotting code.  
  
### Query class methods 
--- 
An *object* is a member of a *class*. Any functions defined in the *class* can be applied to the *object*. It can be useful to determine what kinds of functions or operations can be performed on an object, called *class attributes* or *methods*. An *object* may also have properties that we can access using the `.property` extension. As an example, lets examine the **matplotlib** *figure* object.  

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

myfigure = plt.figure() 

print(type(myfigure))
print(myfigure)
```
This code will create a **matplotlib** figure object and print its type. Checking the type of an object is a good first step when testing new methods or debugging code that doesn't work. Very often a variable is not the type you thought it was, so the functions you are applying don't work.  
  
This code outputs  
```
<class 'matplotlib.figure.Figure'>
<Figure size 640x480 with 0 Axes>
```
  
As you can see, the `type(myfigure)` returned the class that the object belongs to. Printing the object will route the call through the printing method in the class, and may not be that helpful.  
  
To find out what sorts of methods/properties the `figure` object knows about, let's try this code:  
```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

myfigure = plt.figure()

for method in dir(myfigure):
    print(method)
```  
The **`dir()`** function returns all the properties and methods for a given object. You can use the help function to learn more about any property or method:
```python
help(myfigure.show)
```  
Some properties/methods have a leading underscore - these methods/ properties are *private* and are not meant to be manipulated by the user.  
  
To access a property, you can use the `.property` extension:  
```python
myproperty = myfigure.dpi
print(myproperty)
```

### Read the docs  
---
Now that you know what kind of object your variable is, you can also locate its properties and methods directly using the documentation. A quick google will lead you here:  
  

https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.figure.Figure.html#matplotlib.figure.Figure  
  
As you scroll through this page, you should recognize the properties and methods you found with the **`dir()`** command. Its useful to be able to locate this information both ways as some packages don't have published documentation online, but they may have documentation interally wihtin the code that can be accessed with **`dir()`**.  
  
Lastly, we will locate the same information in the source code.  
You can navigate to the Github repository where the class is implemented and search for the object to find the file where it is implemented. For the **matplotlib** figure class, the source code is found here:  
  
https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/blob/main/lib/matplotlib/figure.py
   
If you scroll through this file, you should be able to locate the place where the figure class is defined (line 118). You will also notice documentation that looks like what the `help()` function returns, and additional methods that don't show up on the website documentation. Most of these are the *private* functions and methods mentioned previously. These methods help the rest of the class run, but are not meant to be interacted with by the typical user.
  

## 2.1.2 Applying Class Methods for Complex Formatting
###
## 2.1.3 Writing a Custom Plotting Class  
When you make lots of the same kinds of plots, it can be useful to make your own custom plotting class. We'll now integrate some of the data processing techniques we learned in **2.0 Data Processing and Analysis** with the plotting techniques described here to make a custom object more suited to our needs.  

### Defining the object  
---
The first step in writing a custom plotting class is to define our object. What information does it need? How do we want to use it? Start by writing a sketch of its use.  
  
We'll start with an example using data for a falling object. We want to make graphs of its position, velocity and acceleration. Here is an example:  
```python
import pandas as pd

# read in the data as a pandas dataframe
mydata = pd.read_csv(".\mydata.csv")

# create a custom class object
mydata_object = FallingObject(mydata)

# make the plots - show or save are options
mydata_object.plot_position(show=True)
mydata_object.plot_velocity(save=True, filename="velocity.png")

# if neither option is passed, the plot function returns the figure to we can update it as we want later
acceleration_figure = mydata_object.plot_acceleration()
acceleration_figure.set_title("updated title")

# this function plots position, velocity and acceleration in a single plot
mydata_object.plot_all()
```
Now that we have defined how we will use the custom class, we need to define the class in the code. For our example, we will assume that `mydata.csv` contains only the positions of the falling object and the time. This means we will need to calculate the velocity and acceleration ourselves.  
  
Here is our class definition:  
```python
import numpy as np


class FallingObject():
    # Define the init function
    # --------------------------------------------------------------
    # this is called every time you create a class object
    def __init__(self, dataframe):

        # Assign the columns of the pandas dataframe to class variables
        # --------------------------------------------------------------
        # all variables starting with 'self.' can be accessed by other functions within your class
        self.time = dataframe['time[s]']
        self.position = dataframe['position[m]']

        # Perform some manipulation on the data
        # --------------------------------------------------------------
        # notice how we don't have to pass the time to the get_velocity or
        # get_acceleration functions because we made it a class variable
        # to use the other helper functions we need the 'self.' to call them
        self.velocity = self.get_velocity(self.position)
        self.acceleration = self.get_acceleration(self.velocity)

    # Define methods within the class
    # --------------------------------------------------------------
    def get_velocity(self, position):
        return np.gradient(position, self.time)
    
    def get_acceleration(self, velocity):
        return np.gradient(velocity, self.time)
```
### Writing plotting functions
---
Now we need to extend our class with the plotting functions we planned from the start. We'll need at least these functions:  
* `plot_position()`  
* `plot_velocity()`  
* `plot_acceleration()`  
* `plot_all()` 

We may need other functions to help us along the way as well.  

```python

def plot_position(self, show=False, save=False, filename="position_plot.png"):
    '''
    plots position
    '''
    fig, ax = plt.subplots()
    ax.plot(self.time, self.position)
    ax.set_xlabel("time[s]"); ax.set_ylabel("position[m]")
    ax.set_title("Position v. Time")

    if show == True:
        fig.show()
    if save == True:
        fig.savefig(filename)
    
    return fig, ax


```
### Implementing the class
---
With our class initialized an our plotting functions written, we can stitch them together into a full custom class. You could  paste the code that defines the class into your analysis workbook each time, but the better option is to import it from a separate file. You need to create a `*.py` file that contains your class. The text in the file should look like this:  
```python

# here is the full class definition and description

```  
  
Save the `*.py` file as **FallingObject.py**. In a new notebook, test the class like so:  

```python
from . import FallingObject

# more test code here

```
  
This code is using relative imports, so the FallingObject.py file needs to be in the directory where you are running your analysis notebook. To make this code improtable anywhere, you can simply add the file to your python environment by copying the file to the appropriate directory.  
  
While our custom class exists in its own file, you could have defined multiple classes, or added additional functions that are not class-specific. This is essentially how the python packages and modules you have interacted with thus far work!  
  
---
### Congratulations!  
You have now completed [**2.1 Complex Formatting and Data Visualization**](./2.1_day2_complex_formatting.md).  
Please proceed to [**2.2 Prompt Engineering for Generative AI**](./2.3_day2_applications_to_your_data.md).