# Python Workshop Day 2 
Welcome to the Chemistry Department Programming Workshop Day 2!  
   
These tutorials will focus on more advanced data analysis and visualization tools, and give some time for integration with your own data.
  
Day 2 consists of 4 sub-modules:  
Day 2 consists of 4 sub-modules:  
* [`2.0 Data Processing and Analysis`](./2.0_day2_data_analysis_and_stats.ipynb) – statistical analysis, regression and smoothing  
* [`2.1 Complex Formatting and Data Visualization`](./2.1_day2_complex_formatting.md) – using class strutures to access complex formatting 
* [`2.2 Prompt Engineering for Generative AI`](./2.2_day2_prompt_engineering_for_generative_ai.md) – how to write effective prompts for GPT and interpret the code it writes
* [`2.3 Applications to Your Data`](./2.3_day2_applications_to_your_data.md) – try to apply workshop tools to you own datasets!

## 2.2 Prompt Engineering for Generative AI
---

Now that you've learned the basics, how can you use this information to write better prompts for Generative AI? How can you interpret the code it writes for you?


**Contents**  
  
In this module, you will cover:
 * [2.3.1 Prompt Engineering](#231-prompt-engineering)  
 * [2.3.2 AI Ethics](#232-ai-ethics)  


## 2.3.1 Prompt Engineering
### What is generative AI good at?  
  
* **Syntax**  
  Usually, gen AI will write intelligible syntax, especially if you include keywords in your prompt indicating the language/language version. When the syntax is incorrect, your own python knowlege can help correct it. Often if you run code from a gen AI model and your interpreter throws a syntax error you can feed the error back to the gen AI to resolve it.
* **Alternative packages**  
  Often it is useful to specify which python packages you want the gen AI to use to write a solution, as this constrains the results. This is especially useful if you are more familiar with a particular package and can catch errors that the gen AI might make. Eliminating these constraints yields a very powerful use of gen AI - if you ask it to explicity NOT use a package you think would be helpful, the gen AI may introduce you to other packages that may be more helpful, acting as a jumping off point to learn new packages. Be careful though, as sometimes gen AI will hallucinate packages and syntax that does not exist.  
* **Alternative approaches**  
  A common and useful technique involves requesting an alternative approach. You may feed the gen AI some 'spaghetti code' you have written that gets the job done, but is inefficient or difficult to update. Prompts requesting things like 'reformat the following code into a loop structure' or 'refactor this code to be mroe concise' can be useful to see alternativve approaches. If you have written code that uses a particular package, you may also request the same code written using a different package.  
* **Converting between languages**  
  Sometimes the code you need is available online, but its written in perl, shell or C++. You can fairly effectively translate between languages by requesting this from the gen AI. Alternatively, you might write a python program and request to translate it into another language. You can also convert between language versions. Be careful though - if you can't debug the syntax of one of the languages you are translating from you might get un-usable results.  
* **Commenting/explaining code**  
  What to do when you have some code but don't know what it does? Gen AI is generally pretty good at commenting code. You ccan enhance your results by guiding the prompt: "comment the following code extensively so that a beginner programmer can understand and interpret is function". Requesting comments on specific lines or funtions will also refine results. This technique can be useful to translate code from another language into pseudo-code that you can re-write or re-structure to your purpose in python.
* **String Parsing:**     
  One of the most annoying tasks in the progmamming world is writing regex (regular expressions). This a specific type of syntax commonly used to parse strings (implemented as the re package in python), but it is generally challenging to write and interpret. Gen AI is great at this though! Be sure to give an example of the string you want to parse (often filenames), and the result after the regex application. Gen AI can usually write an appropriate regex string to extrct the information you want. Be careful though- sometimes the regex patterns that gen AI writes will not generalize to the cases you want. For example, if you gave gen AI this filename:  
  "myfile-123-AB.txt"  
  and requested this as an output:  
  "myfile"  
  gen AI might write a regex pattern that nly extracts the first 6 letters from any string, rather than splitting at the "-". Giving multiple examples or explicitly stating which parts of the string are variable often resolves this.  

### What makes a good prompt?  
Adapted from https://leaddev.com/tech/how-write-better-ai-prompts  

A good prompt has 4 main parts:  
* **Context** sets the stage and specifies the role the AI is to play. For example, telling the AI to act like an experienced Python debugger, or a software engineer specializing in secure application development, will help push the tool in the right direction. Explicitly identifying the role of the AI is not usually necessary to acheive usable results, but can be useful when the results are erratic. Sometimes it can be useful to recontextualize your problem in a more general way - instead of "write a python code that normalizes my XRD data", try "write a python code that normalizes an np array".
* **Instructions** are the meat of the prompt. They’re where you give the AI one (and ideally no more) clear command or explanation for what you’d like it to do. For example, you can ask it to write a function, summarize some text, recommend a bug fix, or any other kind of coding task. Guiding the instructions by specifying which lines to edit, which functions to leave alone or which packages to use is generally a good strategy.  
* **Content** is the information you want the AI to work on. If you are asking for some boilerplate code, you might not need to add any. However, if you are asking it to optimize a function, sort a list, or do something with some variables, or anything else, you will need to provide the actual content. To separate it from the other parts of the prompt, it’s best to use delimiters like “”” or ###. Sometimes the code you want the AI to edit interacts with other bits of code the AI doesn't know about, like local modules or classes. Adding a description of the modules and interfaces can help guide the AI to responding to your specific question.  
* **Format** is a final request that tells the AI how you’d like the output. Depending on the prompt, you may want a table, a code snippet, a regex formula, or something else. This is where you would specify if you want comments in the code or not, if the AI should use for loops or while loops, etc. Generally the AI will also incldue some small test code, but you can explicitly request this as well.  

## 2.3.2 AI Ethics

### What are the ethical implications of using generative AI code for my paper?
  
All code is copyrighted by default to the author at its inception. You don't need to do anything for these rules to apply. This means that using someone else's code could violate copyright, and that if you want to share your code (i.e. in a publication) you need to make sure to license it. Its surprisingly easy to license your code, and all you need to do is include text describing allowable use of your code. Most projects in the sciences use the [MIT license](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MIT_License). To apply this to your code, simply copy the license text into a file called LICENSE in the same directory as your code, or add it as a comment to your file. Its that easy!  
  
What about gen AI code? Who is that licensed to? This is a complicated question. Depending on the training data, the gen AI might be pulling from code written and published online that is NOT licensed for use. Book publishers, writers and artists across many fields all face similar issues.  
  
Within the software community copy/pasting code has been common place for years, with people exchanging solutions to bugs, plotting tutorials and other code through online forums. In most cases, code acquired in this way is used without attribution, even if there is a direct quotation of someone else's code. When the copied code becomes an integral part of your project, or extends beyond a few lines, people often attribute the source through linking to the post, tutorial or github account of the person initially responsible. For most code used in this way, the copied code falls under the license of the forum itself. For example, [here is the license information to StackOverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/help/licensing).  

When it comes to gen AI code, there are no current standards. It appears that most code is treated in a similar manner to copy/pasting from an online forum and is used without attribution. If you do use gen AI to develop code integral to your paper, we recommend voluntarily disclosing this, though it is not currently required by many entities. There are several current court cases working to establish a precedent in this area. 

**Further Reading:**
* ACS [article](https://axial.acs.org/publishing/ai-in-research-and-peer-review-facing-the-future-with-integrity) on the use of genAI
  >"The use of AI tools for text or image generation should be disclosed within the Acknowledgment section with a description of when and how the tools were used"
* [*"The Ethics of Using Artificial Intelligence in Scientific Research: New Guidance Needed for a New Tool"*](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s43681-024-00493-8) David Resnik and Mohammad Hosseini (from NIEHS)

---
### Congratulations!  
You have now completed [**2.3 Prompt Engineering for Generative AI**](./2.2_day2_prompt_engineering_for_generative_ai.md).  
Please proceed to [**2.4 Applications to Your Data**](./2.3_day2_applications_to_your_data.md).