Welcome to the Chemistry Department Programming Workshop Day 2!  
   
These tutorials will focus on more advanced data analysis and visualization tools, and give some time for integration with your own data.
  
Day 2 consists of 4 sub-modules:  
Day 2 consists of 4 sub-modules:  
* [`2.0 Data Processing and Analysis`](./2.0_day2_data_analysis_and_stats.ipynb) – statistical analysis, regression and smoothing  
* [`2.1 Complex Formatting and Data Visualization`](./2.1_day2_complex_formatting.md) – using class strutures to access complex formatting 
* [`2.2 Prompt Engineering for Generative AI`](./2.2_day2_prompt_engineering_for_generative_ai.md) – how to write effective prompts for GPT and interpret the code it writes
* [`2.3 Applications to Your Data`](./2.3_day2_applications_to_your_data.md) – try to apply workshop tools to you own datasets!

## 2.3 Applications to Your Data
---

This section of the workshop is mostly free-form. We ask that you try applying the skills you learned to your own data.   
  
We have listed a couple of suggested objectives that should be achievable at your level. You can pick and choose which challenges you would like to attempt or invent your own! Workshop organizers will be available to help if you have questions.  

Suggested objectives:  
* import your datafile and select specific rows or columns
* compute summary statistics across a row or column of your data
* generate a simple plot with properly formatted axes and axis labels
* use generative AI to write a parsing function or a plotting function for your data  
  
You can find some advanced examples that have been used for real projects in the [2.3_examples/](./2.3_examples/) folder.  
  
---
### Congratulations!  
You have now completed the Python Workshop!