# Python Workshop Day 1 
Welcome to the Chemistry Department Programming Workshop Day 1!  
   
These tutorials will focus on...
  
Day 1 consists of three sub-modules:  
* 1.1 External Data Files
* 1.2 TBD
* 1.3 Plotting With Matplotlib

## 1.3 Plotting With Matplotlib
---

**Contents**  
  
In this module, you will:
 * 1.3.0 Import matplotlib packages
 * 1.3.1 Plot 2D data
 * 1.3.2 Format and customize plots
 * 1.3.3 Use loops to plot multiple datasets
 * 1.3.4 Resize and normalize imported data
 * 1.3.5 Generate scatter plots, bar charts, and color maps
 * 1.3.6 Plot multiple datasets using subplots
 * 1.3.7 Add error bars to a plot
 * 1.3.8 Add images (.png, .jpg, etc.) to a plot
 

## 1.3.0 Importing matplotlib packages
The **matplotlib** library is huge and has many valuable tools at your disposal. There are also a wide range of other packages that can be implemented in tandem with **matplotlib**. 
For the purposes of this tutorial, we will focus on a few commonly used packages, rather than any kind of extensive list. 
For further information about **matplotlib**, as well as additional tutorials and examples, see the [matplotlib documentation](https://matplotlib.org/stable/index.html).

First, we will need to import the **matplotlib.pyplot** package, which is what allows us to actually create plots in Python. 
Since the package name is quite long, I often use an abbreviated name when importing. As an example, 

```
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
```

will allow us to call the **matplotlib.pyplot** package with the keyword *plt* instead of having to use the entire package name.

Some other useful packages included in this tutorial are `matplotlib.lines`, `matplotlib.ticker`, and `colour.Color`.

## 1.3.1 Plotting 2D data
To demonstrate how to use **matplotlib** to plot 2D data, we will generate some simple dummy data with **numpy**. First, we want to make sure we have imported the **numpy** package.

```
import numpy as np
```

Above, I use abbreviated variable name *np* to avoid typing out **numpy** in full every time it is called.

### Generating data with numpy
---
There are numerous methods for generating data with **numpy**, here we look at three simple options:
- `numpy.linspace` returns an array of evenly spaced values over a specified interval ([documentation](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.linspace.html))
- `numpy.arange` returns an array of evenly spaced values with specific spacing between values ([documentation](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.arange.html))
- `numpy.logspace` returns an array of evenly spaced values on a log scale ([documentation](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.logspace.html#numpy.logspace))

The following code snippet will generate an array containing values 1, 2, 3,..., 49, 50 and store that array under the variable name `x_data`. 
The variables passed are the starting value (1), the end value (50), and the number of samples to generate (50).

```
x_data = np.linspace(1, 50, 50)
```

Similarly, this snippet will generate an array containing values 0, 2, 4,..., 98, 100 and store that array under the variable name `y_data`.
The variables passed are the starting value (0), the non-inclusive end value (100), and the spacing between values (2).

```
y_data = np.arange(0, 100, 2)
```

### Generating a figure and adding data
---
To create a figure using **matplotlib**, we first need to create an instance of the **figure** object. 
Essentially, this generates a blank figure/plot that data can then be added to. To do this, we will run: 

```
fig = plt.figure()
```

Remember, we imported **matplotlib.pyplot** as *plt*. In this instance, I am using the variable name *fig* to store this figure.

To specify the figure size, we can pass the parameter `figsize` when creating a new figure object. For example, the following code generates an 8 x 8 in. figure:

```
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(8,8))
```

To add data to our plot, we will use the `plot` function. To add the data generated in the previous section (*x_data* and *y_data*), use the following code snippet:

```
plt.plot(x_data, y_data)
```

**Note:** The data arrays must be the same size.

Any number of datasets can be added to a single plot with multiple `plot` statements. The following code generates a second set of y-axis data and plots it on the pre-existing figure.

```
y2_data = np.logspace(0, 2, 50)

plt.plot(x_data, y2_data)
```

## 1.3.2 Formating and customizing plots
The `plot` method has many different optional parameters for customizing/formatting **figure** objects. 
For a full list of options, see the [documentation](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.plot.html). 

### Plot axes
---
While **matplotlib** will automatically scale the plot axes, often we want to adjust the scale of axes manually. 
To do this, we use `xlim` and `ylim`, where the minimum and maximum axis values are passed as parameters.

```
plt.xlim(0, 50)
```

I find the `min` and `max` functions from **numpy** to be helpful for setting axis limits if you are unsure of the exact minimum/maximum values of a certain dataset.

```
plt.ylim(0, np.max(y2_data))
```

If we want to add some extra space beyond the data limits: 

```
plt.xlim(0, np.max(x_data)+1)

plt.ylim(0, np.max(y2_data)+2)
```

Axis labels are added with `xlabel` and `ylabel`. In this example, I specify the font size to be 20pt with `fontsize=20`:

```
plt.xlabel('X Axis Label', fontsize='20')

plt.ylabel('Y Axis Label', fontsize='20')
```

**Note:** The `fontsize` parameter requires a string, not an integer.

The axis ticks can be customized using `tick_params`, which requires the `axis` parameter to be specified as `'x'`, `'y'`, or `'both'`. 
Here, I am adjusting the fontsize of the tick labels to match that of the axis labels:

```
plt.tick_params(axis='both', labelsize='20')
```

### Customizing plot appearance
---
Some more common plotting parameters include:
- `color` sets the line color; there are some built-in colors already defined, or hex/RGB/RGBA codes can be specified
- `linestyle` changes the line from a solid line to a specified style (e.g., dashed, dotted, etc.)
- `linewidth` sets the line thickness

But, there are lots of other parameters to play around with besides these three!

Let's change the line color and width of our first data set. To add these parameters, we just include them within the parentheses of the same function we use to plot the data.
Here, I'm using the pre-defined color `'purple'`, note that the `color` parameter must be in quotes. The `linewidth` parameter passes a numerical value.

```
plt.plot(x_data, y_data, color='purple', linewidth=3)
```

Then, we will change the line style and color of the second data set. I'm using a hex code for `color` in this case. The `linestyle` parameter requires a string, so must also be in quotes.

```
plt.plot(x_data, y2_data, color='#00B8FF', linestyle='dashed')
```

### Adding a legend
---
The simplest way to add a legend to a figure is to pass the `label` parameter when using `plot` to append data. 
Using the `legend` function will automatically include any dataset with a label in the legend.

```
plt.plot(x_data, y_data, color='purple', label='Dataset 1')

plt.plot(x_data, y2_data, color='#00B8FF', label='Dataset 2')

plt.legend(fontsize='20', handlelength=1)
```

Here, I've used optional parameters `fontsize` and `handlelength` to set the font size and the length of the legend lines. 
There are a number of other optional `legend` parameters, which can be found in the documentation.

Another option for creating legends, which is more involved but allows for more flexibility, is to create handles using **matplotlib** package `lines`:

```
import matplotlib.lines as line
```

A unique handle can be generated for each dataset we wish to include in the legend. Since we are not plotting this line on a coordinate system, we pass empty arrays for the *x* and *y* parameters.

```
y1_handle = line.Line2D([], [], color='purple', linewidth=3, label='Dataset 1')

y2_handle = line.Line2D([], [], color='#00B8FF', linestyle='dashed', label='Dataset 2')
```

Then, when implementing the `legend` function, we specify a list of handles to include:

```
plt.legend(handles=[y1_handle, y2_handle], fontsize='20', handlelength=1)
```

Generally, this method for creating a legend is most useful when using loops and/or subplots to display data.

### Using colour.Color
---
Another useful package we can import to make plots more visually appealing is **colour.Color**.

```
from colour import Color
```

I like to use this package to create color gradients using `range_to` when plotting multiple datasets on one figure.
The following snippet defines a starting color (*color1*) and an end color (*color2*) for the gradient and the number of colors total. 
Having the `range_to` function within `list()` returns the gradient as a list of hex codes with the specified length.

```
color1 = Color('#1F5673')

color2 = Color('#81F4E1')

gradient = list(color1.range_to(color2, 5))
```

### Exporting a figure as an image
---
To export a figure as an image file, use `savefig` with a parameter specifying the file path, name, and extension. The resolution can be set with optional argument `dpi`.

```
plt.savefig('./figure_name.png', dpi=1000)
```

## 1.3.3 Using loops to plot multiple datasets
In the previous section, we generated a color gradient with five different colors. Now, we can generate some data to show off this color gradient.

```
y3_data = np.logspace(0, 2.5, 50)

y4_data = np.logspace(0, 3, 50)

y5_data = np.logspace(0, 3.5, 50)

y6_data = np.logspace(0, 4, 50)
```

We can use a loop to iterate through the datasets we want to add to the figure without writing five separate `plot` statements. 
First, we want a list of all the datasets we're interested in plotting.

```
y_list = [y2_data, y3_data, y4_data, y5_data, y6_data]
```

Then, we can create a figure and iterate through the list of y-axis data with a **for loop**. 
We also want to include colors from the custom gradient. Values stored in the gradient list need to be called with `gradient[i].hex` for matplotlib to read them correctly in the `color` argument.

```
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(8, 8))

for i in range(len(y_data_list)):
    plt.plot(x_data, y_data_list[i], color=gradient[i].hex)

plt.xlim(35, 50)
```

## 1.3.4 Resizing and normalizing imported data
Often, imported experimental data needs to be resized. For more information on importing external data, see *tutorial 1.1*. 
Here, I'm importing experimental and calculated X-ray diffraction patterns of silicon, which are neither the same length nor have the same maximum intensities.
To account for this, the data will need to be resized and normalized. First, let's import the data:

```
expt_Si_x, expt_Si_y = np.loadtxt('./data/Si_Expt.txt', unpack=True, dtype=float)

calc_Si_x, calc_Si_y = np.loadtxt('./data/Si_Calc.txt', unpack=True, dtype=float)
```

Next, we are going to resize the calculated data to be the same size as the experimental data. Remember, the x and y data must be the same size to plot them in the same **matplotlib** figure.
Using `shape` from the **numpy** package returns the size of the referenced array.

```
calc_Si_x = np.resize(calc_Si_x, expt_Si_x.shape)

calc_Si_y = np.resize(calc_Si_y, expt_Si_y.shape)
```

Since the data I'm using here are from two different sources, I also want to normalize the relative peak intensities. Whether or not you decide to do this will depend on your data.
Here, I'm using the following equation: normalized values = original values / maximum value from original data set

```
expt_Si_y = (expt_Si_y / np.max(expt_Si_y))

calc_Si_y = (calc_Si_y / np.max(calc_Si_y))
```

## 1.3.5 Generating scatter plots, bar charts, and color maps
Now, let's look at a few different types of plots we can generate with **matplotlib**. This is by no means an extensive list, but a good set of tools to get started.

### Scatter plots
---
To demonstrate creating a scatter plot, I will use the imported X-ray diffraction data from the previous section. 
To plot a dataset as a scatter plot, we use `scatter` in a similar way to `plot`, with the main difference being that the arguments `marker` and `s` can be passed to set the marker shape and size.

```
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(8, 8))

plt.scatter(expt_Si_x, expt_Si_y, color='black', marker='.', s=40, label='Experimental')
plt.plot(calc_Si_x, calc_Si_y, color='orange', linewidth=2, label='Calculated')

plt.xlim(10, 80)
plt.tick_params(axis='both', labelsize='20')

plt.legend(handlelength=1, fontsize=20)

# you can use unicode symbols in strings with the '\u' escape key
plt.xlabel(u'2\u03B8 (degrees)', fontsize='20')
plt.ylabel('Intensity (a.u., normalized)', fontsize='20')

# set a title
plt.title('Cool and Fun Title', fontsize='20')
```

Since this example uses real data, the axis labels are changed to reflect what is being plotted.
Unicode characters can be included either directly in a string, or with the `\u` escape key and the Unicode standard corresponding to the character you want to use. 
For example, we could include the string *'Je suis français'*, and the cedilla character displays as expected.
The example above includes the theta symbol, which corresponds to Unicode standard U+03B8, 
so *'\u03B8'* is used to include Unicode character for theta (using LaTeX math mode for special characters and equations is demonstrated in another tutorial).

Additionally, a plot title is included using `title`.

### Bar charts
---
To demonstrate creating a bar chart, let's plot some pH values of common household solutions. 
First, we will want to make two lists, one for the solutions (strings) and one for the pH values (floats).

```
solns = ['Lemon Juice', 'Orange Juice', 'Water', 'Hand Soap', 'Bleach', 'Milk', 'Cola']
pH = [2.2, 3.5, 7.0, 9.5, 12.5, 6.5, 3.0]
```

We can set up our blank figure object as normal, then add the bar chart with `bar(x, height)`. Adjusting the labels and ticks remains the same as with `plot` and `scatter`.

```
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(8, 8))

plt.bar(solns, pH)

plt.xlabel('Solution', fontsize='18')
plt.ylabel('pH', fontsize='18')

plt.tick_params(axis='y', labelsize='18')
plt.tick_params(axis='x', labelsize='14', labelrotation=45)
```

I've made the x-axis labels a bit smaller and rotated them 45 degrees so the text doesn't overlap.

We can also change the colors of individual bars on the plot. For this example, let's have all the acidic solutions be one color and basic solutions another color.
To do this, we will first create an empty list:

```
colors = []
```

Then, we will iterate through our list of pH values using a **for loop** to see if the pH corresponds to an acidic, basic, or neutral solution.
Based on that value, we will append the appropriate color to the list of colors using `append`.

```
colors = []
for i in range(len(pH)):
    if pH[i] < 7.0:
        colors.append('springgreen')
    elif pH[i] > 7.0:
        colors.append('mediumpurple')
    elif pH[i] == 7.0:
        colors.append('skyblue')
```

Next, set the `color` parameter equal to this list when calling the `bar` function.

```
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(8, 8))

plt.bar(solns, pH, color=colors)

plt.xlabel('Solution', fontsize='18')
plt.ylabel('pH', fontsize='18')

plt.tick_params(axis='y', labelsize='18')
plt.tick_params(axis='x', labelsize='14', labelrotation=45)
```

We can also include a legend that tells us which color corresponds to what solution type. Let's import **matplotlib.lines** and create three handles to put in a legend,
corresponding to acidic, basic, and neutral solutions.

```
import matplotlib.lines as line
acid = line.Line2D([], [], color='springgreen', linewidth=10, label='Acid')
base = line.Line2D([], [], color='mediumpurple', linewidth=10, label='Base')
neutral = line.Line2D([], [], color='skyblue', linewidth=10, label='Neutral')

plt.legend(handles=[acid, base, neutral], handlelength=1, fontsize=18)
```

### Heatmaps / colormaps
---
To demonstrate creating heatmaps, we will plot some temperature data corresponding to various US cities and divided by seasons.
First, we will create a few lists of data: cities (strings), seasons (strings), and temperatures. 
The dataset for temperature is a bit more complex, since we need to separate the data by both city and season. 
So, we'll create a list for the average temperatures of each season for each city, then add each of those lists to an array.

```
city = ['New York', 'Los Angeles', 'Chicago', 'Houston']
season = ['Winter', 'Summer', 'Spring', 'Fall']

temp = np.array([[33.7, 74.5, 57.8, 57.6],
                [60.1, 68.2, 64.5, 65.7],
                [22.9, 72.2, 55.7, 51.6],
                [53.0, 83.3, 72.7, 53.0]])
```

For clarity, *temp* is an array containing four elements, each of which is a list. Each of these lists contains the average temperature of each season for a certain city.
The first entry is the average temperature for each season in New York, the second entry are temperatures in Los Angeles, the third and fourth in Chicago and Houston.

We can set up our blank figure object as normal, then create a categorical heat map with `imshow`.

```
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(8, 8))

plt.title('Average Temperature in US Cities (\u00B0F)', fontsize='18')

im = plt.imshow(temp)
```

Since the `imshow` function only parses the *temp* data, not *city* or *season*, we will want to add these as axis labels.
We can use `xticks` and `yticks` to specify how many ticks/labels we need for each axis. 
To avoid having to count these by hand, we can use `np.arange(len(data))` to set the number of ticks/labels to the length of a given list.

```
plt.xticks(ticks=np.arange(len(season)), labels=season, fontsize='18')
plt.yticks(ticks=np.arange(len(city)), labels=city, fontsize='18')
```

Above, the number of x-axis and y-axis ticks/labels are set to the lengths of *season* and *city*, respectively. 
Then, the tick labels are set to the values contained in each of those lists. I've also adjusted the font size here.

Next, since the colors on the heatmap only give us realtive information about the temperatures, let's add the actual temperature values to each square.
We will do this using a **nested for loop** that iterates through both the *season* and *city* lists.

```
for i in range(len(season)):
    for j in range(len(city)):
        text = plt.text(i, j, temp[j, i], ha='center', va='center', color='w', fontsize='18')
```

In the statement inside the for loops, `text` is used to add labels to each square by iterating through each entry in *season* (i), *city* (j), and the corresponding *temp* entry (j, i).
Additionally, I've set the horizontal and vertical alignments with `ha` and `va`, the text `color` to white, and `fontsize` to 18.

Lastly, we can add a color bar to show the scale of temperature values and their corresponding colors on the map. 
To do this, we can use `colorbar`. One caveat here is that we need to store a variable name for the heatmap itself:

```
im = plt.imshow(temp)
```

as `colorbar` necessitates this as a parameter. Adding the color bar to the figure:

```
plt.colorbar(im, fraction=0.046, pad=0.04)
```

The `fraction` and `pad` parameters adjust the location of the color bar within the figure. 
Generally, the values 0.046 and 0.04 work well to match the height of the color bar to the height of the main plot, regardless of size.

Another useful feature for `imshow` plots is `interpolation`. 

```
im = plt.imshow(temp, interpolation='gaussian')
```

The different interpolation methods can be found in this [example](https://matplotlib.org/stable/gallery/images_contours_and_fields/interpolation_methods.html#sphx-glr-gallery-images-contours-and-fields-interpolation-methods-py).


## 1.3.6 Plotting multiple datasets using subplots
**Matplotlib** also includes a robust library for generating subplots. This process differs a bit from creating a single figure, but generally follows a similar methodology.

First, we will want to create a new `subplots` object. This requires us to denote a variable name for both the figure as a whole, and for the individual subplots making up the figure.
Below, the *fig* variable refers to the entire figure and *ax* refers to the actual subplots. We need to specify the number of rows and columns of subplots to generate in the parentheses.

This statement generates two rows of subplots and one column:

```
fig, ax = plt.subplots(2, 1)
```

To reference a specific subplot, we use the *ax* variable name with row and column indicies (i.e., *ax[0][0]* corresponds to the subplot in the first row and column).
If there is only one row or column, the index does not need to be included. The above figure only has one column and two rows, so we can reference the top subplot with *ax[0]* and the bottom with *ax[1]*.

Other parameters for `subplots`, such as shared axes and height or width ratios, are found in the [documentation](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.subplots.html).

For the following example, we will use the silicon X-ray diffraction data from the previous section and import another set of diffraction data for the compouned Al<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub>.
This data will also need to be resized and normalized, as we did with the silicon data.

```
expt_Al2O3_x, expt_Al2O3_y = np.loadtxt('./data/Al2O3_Expt.txt', unpack=True, dtype=float)
calc_Al2O3_x, calc_Al2O3_y = np.loadtxt('./data/Al2O3_Calc.txt', unpack=True, dtype=float)

calc_Al2O3_x = np.resize(calc_Al2O3_x, expt_Al2O3_x.shape)
calc_Al2O3_y = np.resize(calc_Al2O3_y, expt_Al2O3_y.shape)

expt_Al2O3_y = (expt_Al2O3_y / np.max(expt_Al2O3_y))
calc_Al2O3_y = (calc_Al2O3_y / np.max(calc_Al2O3_y))
```

Now, we will create a `subplots` object with two rows and one column.

```
fig, ax = plt.subplots(2, 1, figsize=(8, 8))
```

Then, we can display the silicon dataset on the top plot.

```
ax[0].scatter(expt_Si_x, expt_Si_y, color='black', marker='.', s=40, label='Experimental Si')
ax[0].plot(calc_Si_x, calc_Si_y, color='orange', linewidth=2, label='Calculated Si')
```

And the Al<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub> on the bottom plot.

```
ax[1].scatter(expt_Al2O3_x, expt_Al2O3_y, color='black', marker='.', s=40, label='Experimental Al2O3')
ax[1].plot(calc_Al2O3_x, calc_Al2O3_y, color='red', linewidth=2, label='Calculated Al2O3')
```

### Use a loop to change parameters on multiple subplots
---
To avoid using the same statement repetitively to change the same parameters on each subplot, we can use loops to make the process more efficient.

**Note:** Some of the methods for changing parameters have slightly different names when modifying a `subplots` object instead of a `figure` object (i.e., `set_xlim` instead of `xlim`).

Below, a **for loop** is used to change the axis limits, labels, and legends of both subplots:

```
for i in range(2):
    ax[i].set_xlim(10, 80)
    ax[i].tick_params(axis='both', labelsize='20')
    ax[i].legend(handlelength=1, fontsize=16)
```

We can also use `supxlabel` and `supylabel` to set axis labels for the entire figure instead of individual subplots.

```
fig.supxlabel(u'2\u03B8 (degrees)', fontsize='20')
fig.supylabel('Intensity (a.u., normalized)', fontsize='20', x=-0.02)
```

### Adding text to plots
---
Additional strings of text are added to plots using `text(x_position, y_position, 'Text')`. The horizontal and vertical alignments can be set with parameters `ha` and `va`.

```
ax[0].text(11, 1.02, 'Silicon', color='orange', fontsize='20', ha='left', va='top')
ax[1].text(11, 1.02, 'Al\u2082O\u2083', color='red', fontsize='20', ha='left', va='top')
```

### Hiding axes and changing subplot spacing
---
Details about a specific subplot axis can be returned with `ax[row][col].get_xaxis()` (or `get_yaxis()`). 
This can also be used to set an axis to be invisible with `set_visible(False)`.

```
ax[0].get_xaxis().set_visible(False)
```

Adjusting the spacing between subplots is done with `subplots_adjust()`, where parameters `hspace` and `wspace` modify the height and width, respectively.

```
plt.subplots_adjust(hspace=0.05)
```

### Adding and adjusting minor ticks
---
The package **matplotlib.ticker** allows us to make adjustments to the axis ticks of a figure. Specifically, we will want to import **MultipleLocator** from the **ticker** package:

```
from matplotlib.ticker import MultipleLocator
```

The `set_major_locator()` and `set_minor_locator()` methods applied to `ax[row][col].xaxis` or `ax[row][col].yaxis` allows the tick locations to be specified for major and minor ticks, respectively.
To set the tick spacing interval, we can use `MultipleLocator(num)`.

```
ax[1].xaxis.set_minor_locator(MultipleLocator(2))
```

The above code snippet adds minor ticks at intervals of 2 on the x-axis.

The tick label formatting can be set using `set_major_formatter()`. The following changes the y-axis formatting to display only one decimal place:

```
for i in range(2):
    ax[i].yaxis.set_major_formatter('{x:.1f}')
```

## 1.3.7 Adding error bars to a plot
Next, we will learn how to include error bars on a plot with **matplotlib**. For this example, let's define three (*x,y*) data points, each with a different +/- error.

```
x = [1, 2, 3]
y = [3, 7, 6]
err = [0.12, 0.55, 0.24]
```

Then, we can plot these data points on a new figure object using `errorbar`. 

```
fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(8,8))

ax.errorbar(x, y, err)
```

**Note**: The default errorbar sizes are symmetric +/- values for all data points. Separate + and - values for each bar can be specified by using a 2-D array 
(see [docs](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.errorbar.html)).

Let's customize some elements of this plot. First, we will change the data points to be single markers instead of connected by a line by including `fmt` as a parameter.
The `fmt` parameter parses a string consisting of a part for color, marker, and line, *fmt = '\[marker\]\[line\]\[color\]*, each of which is optional.

```
ax.errorbar(x, y, err, fmt='ro')
```

Above, I've set `fmt` to be *'ro'*, which produces red (*r*) circle markers (*o*) with no line. 
See the Notes section in the **plot** [documentation](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.plot.html) for more details.

Next, let's add caps to the ends of the error bars with the parameter `capsize`, which defines the length of the error bar caps in units of points.

```
ax.errorbar(x, y, err, fmt='ro', capsize=2)
```

Beyond this, the `errorbar` method functions very similarly to any of the other plotting methods in **matplotlib** with regard to customization.

## 1.3.8 Adding images to a plot
The last section in this tutorial covers adding an image to a figure object in **matplotlib**. First, we will need to import **Image** from **PIL** (Python Imaging Library).

```
from PIL import Image
```

This package allows us to open and manipulate images within a Python environment.

Next, we can open an image file with `Image.open`. I'm going to add a picture of my cat, Stump, because I think he is handsome and would be an excellent addition to any figure.

```
stump_open = Image.open('./Data/stump.png')
```

Then, we will need to convert the image data into a **numpy array** to be able to plot it.

```
stump = np.array(stump_open)
```

We can display the image as its own figure using `imshow`.

```
plt.imshow(stump)
```

Let's recycle the scatter plot we made in the previous section and append the image to this figure. 
To do this, we are going to add another set of axes within the figure using `add_axes`.

```
stump_ax = fig.add_axes([0.1, 0.3, 0.375, 0.5])
```

Inside `add_axes` is an array of values that define the position and size of the axes, \[*x_pos, y_pos, width, height*\], in units of fractions of figure width and height.
I've used the width and height ratio of the original image size to set the width and height here.

Now, we can add the image to the axes and set the axis to 'off' to hide the tick marks and borders.

```
stump_ax.imshow(stump)
stump_ax.axis('off')
```

### Adjusting image color
---
We can also manipulate images. Let's add another image (my mom's cat, Jellybean) and play with the color.

```
jellybean_open = Image.open('./Data/jellybean.png')
jellybean = np.array(jellybean_open)
```

Since the original colors of the image are stored as RGBA values, we can't apply a preset colormap, but we can adjust the color manually by setting the image RGB values.
The following code stores a copy of the original image with the R and G values kept the same, but the B values set to 0.

```
jellybean_color = jellybean[:,:,0]
```

Then, we can add new axes and display the image, as we did before.

```
jellybean_ax = fig.add_axes([0.6, 0.5, 0.225, 0.3])
jellybean_ax.imshow(jellybean_color)
jellybean_ax.axis('off')
```

### Rotating images
---
For this last example, we'll do something a bit more advanced: rotate an image. Again, let's import another image (a friend's cat, Maisie).
But, before we convert the image to an array, we will want to use `rotate` and convert the rotated image instead.

```
maisie_open = Image.open('./Data/maisie.png')
maisie_rotate = maisie_open.rotate(120)
maisie = np.array(maisie_rotate)
```

Now, add the new axes and display the image, as we did before.

```
maisie_ax = fig.add_axes([0.3, -0.1, 0.8, 0.8])
maisie_ax.imshow(maisie)
maisie_ax.axis('off')
```

---
### Congratulations!  
You have now completed 1.3 Plotting With Matplotlib.